# OOP

#### ✅ Is Java purely object-oriented language?
Java is not a fully object-oriented language as it supports primitive data types like int, byte, long, short, etc., which are not objects. Only **Smalltalk** and **Self** are recognised as purely object-oriented languages.


#### ✅ Key Rules of Method Overloading
  - Same class
  - Same name.
  - The method parameters must change: either the number or the type of parameters must be different in the two methods.
  - Return type can be freely modified.
  - Access modifier (public, private, and so on) can be freely modified.
  - Thrown exceptions, if any, can be freely modified.


#### ✅ Key Rules of Method Overriding
  - Same name
  - Parameter (number, type) must be same.
  - Return type must be same.
  - Access modifier must be either the same or a less restrictive one (for example, if the overridden method is protected, you can declare the overriding method as public, but not private).
  - Thrown checked exceptions, if any, can be removed or reduced by the overriding method. This means that the overriding method can throw the same checked exception as the overridden method, or a subclass of that checked exception, but not a broader exception. This restriction does not apply to unchecked exceptions.


#### ✅ Few tricky things about interfaces
  - An interface is a contract
  - Variables in an interface are by default public, static, final.
  - Variables in an interface cannot be declared private.
  - Interface methods are by default public and abstract.
  - An interface can extend another interface.
  - A class can implement multiple interfaces.


#### ✅ Types of Access Modifier
- **Default**:	declarations are visible only within the package (package private)
- **Private**:	declarations are visible within the class only
- **Protected**:	declarations are visible within the package or all subclasses
- **Public**:	declarations are visible everywhere

#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
