# Functional Programming



#### ✅ What is a lambda expression, and what is its ideal use case?
A lambda expression is a function that can be referenced and passed around as an object. Lambda expressions helped introduce the functional programming paradigm to Java. Most Java functions exist inside an object’s scope, but lambda expressions do not and can be called from anywhere in the program.

Lambda expressions are often used to express instances of single-method classes more clearly and compactly than if you used the syntax of anonymous classes.



#### ✅ Explain the syntax of a lambda expression.
A lambda expression consists of:
  - **Arguments**: Formal parameters enclosed in parentheses. A lambda expression can have zero or more parameters.
  - **The array token ->**: Points arguments to the body of the lambda expression.
  - **Body**: Contains expressions or statements. If there is only one statement, curly braces are not required.

```(Arguments list)->{statements;}```


#### ✅ Functional interface?
A functional interface in Java 8 is an interface that can **only have one abstract method**. Functional interfaces are also referred to as SAM interfaces, or, Single Abstract Method interfaces. However, they can contain any number of default or static methods.
 
The **@FunctionalInterface annotation is optional** and can be used to prevent functional interfaces from having more than one abstract method.

Java 8 introduced four types of functional interfaces:
  - **Consumer**: Accepts an argument, returns nothing.
  - **Function**: Accepts an argument, returns a value.
  - **Predicate**: Accepts an argument, returns a boolean value.
  - **Supplier**: Does not accept an argument, returns a value.

#### ✅ What conditions must be fulfilled to match a lambda expression against a functional interface?
There are three conditions that must be satisfied:
  - The functional interface must only have one unimplemented method.
  - The parameters within the method must match the parameters of the lambda expression.
  - The return type of the method must match the return type of the lambda expression.


#### ✅ What is the Stream API, and how is it used?
The Stream API is used to convey collections of objects or primitives from a data source through a “stream” that performs computational operations on the various data elements passing through.

Three main components of a Stream:
  - A data source.
  - A set of intermediate operations to process the data.
  - A sole terminal operation to return the result.


#### ✅ What are intermediate operations, and what do they do?
Stream intermediate operations return another Stream as a result, allowing you to call multiple operations as a query. Intermediate operations are considered “lazy” because they do not evaluate until a terminal operation initiates.
  - **map()**: Returns the results of a Stream after a given function is applied to the elements of a Stream.
  - **filter()**: Returns a Stream consisting of elements that match a given predicate (another type of functional interface).
  - **sorted()**: Returns the elements of a Stream after they have been sorted.
  - **distinct()**: Returns a stream consisting of the distinct elements (Removes duplicate).
  - **flatMap()**: Is the combination of a map and a flat operation. This means you first apply the map function and then flatten the result. 
  - **limit()**: Returns a stream with the limited size given.
  - **peek()**: Returns a stream consisting of the elements of this stream, additionally performing the provided action on each element.
  - **skip()**: This method skips the given n elements and returns a Stream. This is the most useful when want to perform any operations on last n records or lines from a List or Stream.

#### ✅ What are terminal operations, and what do they do?
Terminal operations denote the end of a Stream and return the result.
  - **collect()**: Returns the collective result of all intermediate operations performed on the Stream.
  - **forEach()**: Accepts a consumer and iterates through each element of a Stream.
  - **reduce()**: Reduces the elements of a Stream and returns the result as a single value.
  - **count()**: Returns the number of elements in a Stream.
  - **min()**: Returns the smallest element from a Stream.
  - **max()**: Returns the greatest element from a Stream.
  - **anyMatch()**: The Java Stream anyMatch() method is a terminal operation that takes a single Predicate as a parameter, starts the internal iteration of the Stream, and applies the Predicate parameter to each element.
  - **allMatch()**: The Java Stream allMatch() method is a terminal operation that takes a single Predicate as the parameter, starts the internal iteration of elements in the Stream, and applies the Predicate parameter to each element.
  - **findAny()**: The Java Stream findAny() method can find a single element from the Stream. The element found can be from anywhere in the Stream. There is no guarantee about from where in the stream the element is taken.
  - **findFirst()**: The Java Stream findFirst() method finds the first element in the Stream if any elements are present in the Stream. The findFirst() method returns an Optional from which you can obtain the element if present. 



#### ✅ What is the difference between Collection and Stream?
The main difference between a Collection and a Stream is that **Collection contains its elements, but a Stream doesn't**. Stream work on a view where elements are actually stored by Collection or array, but unlike other views, any change made on Stream doesn't reflect on the original Collection.


#### ✅ What do you mean by saying Stream is lazy?
When we say Stream is lazy, we mean that most of the methods are defined on Java .util.stream.Stream class is lazy i.e. they will not work by just including them on the Stream pipeline.

They only work when you call a terminal method on the Stream and finish as soon as they find the data they are looking for rather than scanning through the whole set of data.

#### ✅ Can a functional interface extend/inherit another interface?
A functional interface cannot extend another interface with abstract methods as it will void the rule of one abstract method per functional interface. 


#### ✅ What is the default method, and why is it required?
A method in the interface that has a predefined body is known as the default method. It uses the keyword default. default methods were introduced in Java 8 to have 'Backward Compatibility in case JDK modifies any interfaces. In case a new abstract method is added to the interface, all classes implementing the interface will break and will have to implement the new method. With default methods, there will not be any impact on the interface implementing classes. default methods can be overridden if needed in the implementation. Also, it does not qualify as synchronized or final.


#### ✅ What are static methods in Interfaces?
Static methods, which contains method implementation is owned by the interface and is invoked using the name of the interface, it is suitable for defining the utility methods and cannot be overridden.


#### ✅ What is Java Parallel Streams?
Java Parallel Streams is a feature of Java 8 and higher, meant for utilizing multiple cores of the processor. Normally any java code has one stream of processing, where it is executed sequentially. Whereas by using parallel streams, we can divide the code into multiple streams that are executed in parallel on separate cores and the final result is the combination of the individual outcomes. The order of execution, however, is not under our control.

Therefore, it is advisable to use parallel streams in cases where no matter what is the order of execution, the result is unaffected and the state of one element does not affect the other as well as the source of the data also remains unaffected.

There are two ways we can create which are listed below and described later as follows:
  - Using parallel() method on a stream
  - Using parallelStream() on a Collection 

#### ✅ Difference in parallelStream() and stream().parallel()
Collections.parallelStream() uses the source collection’s default Spliterator to split the data source to enable parallel execution. Splitting the data source evenly is important to enabling correct parallel execution. An unevenly split data source does more harm in parallel execution than its sequential counterpart.

We have been using List<Book> to hold our list of books in all these examples. Let’s now try to create a custom Collection for our Books by overriding the Collection<T> interface. 

```
public class Book {
    private String name;
    private String author;
    private int yearPublished;
    
    // getters and setters
}
```

We should remember that overriding an interface means we would have to provide our implementation of the abstract methods defined in the base interface. However, we see that methods such as spliterator(), stream(), and parallelStream() are present as default methods in the interface. These methods have an implementation provided by default. However, we can override those implementations with our versions nonetheless.

We’ll call our custom Collection for Books, MyBookContainer and we’ll define our own Spliterator as well: 

```
public class BookSpliterator<T> implements Spliterator<T> {
    private final Object[] books;
    private int startIndex;
    public BookSpliterator(Object[] books, int startIndex) {
        this.books = books;
        this.startIndex = startIndex;
    }
    
    @Override
    public Spliterator<T> trySplit() {
        // Always Assuming that the source is too small to split, returning null
        return null;
    }

    // Other overridden methods such as tryAdvance(), estimateSize() etc
}
```

In the above code snippet, we see that our version of the Spliterator takes in an array of Objects(in our case, Book) to split, and in the trySplit() method, it always returns null. 

We should note that this implementation of the Spliterator<T> interface is error-prone and does not partition the data into equal parts; instead returns null, resulting in unbalanced data. This is simply for representation purposes.

We will use this Spliterator in our custom Collection class MyBookContainer: 

```
public class MyBookContainer<T> implements Collection<T> {
    private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;
    private T[] elements;

    public MyBookContainer(T[] elements) {
        this.elements = elements;
    }

    @Override
    public Spliterator<T> spliterator() {
        return new BookSpliterator(elements, 0);
    }

    @Override
    public Stream<T> parallelStream() {
        return StreamSupport.stream(spliterator(), false);
    }
    
    // standard overridden methods of Collection Interface
}
```

We’ll try to store data in our custom container class and perform parallel Stream operations on it:

```
long usingWithCustomSpliterator(MyBookContainer<Book> listOfBooks, int year) {
    AtomicLong countOfBooks = new AtomicLong();
    listOfBooks.parallelStream()
      .forEach(book -> {
          if (book.getYearPublished() == year) {
              countOfBooks.getAndIncrement();
          }
      });
    return countOfBooks.get();
}
```

The data source in this example is an instance of the MyBookContainer type. This code internally uses our custom Spliterator to split the data source. The resultant parallel Stream will be a sequential stream at best. 

We just exploited the parallelStream() method to return a sequential stream, even though the name suggests parallelStream. This is where the method differs from stream().parallel(), which always tries to return a parallel version of the stream provided to it.

#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
#### ✅ 
