# Network Protocols
  - Client server interacts with each other using some network protocol
  - Protocols are a set of predefined rules
  - Network protocol consisits of type of messages, format of messages, order of the message, response structure
  - Some of the protocols are - IP, TCP, HTTP

### IP - Internet Protocol
Stands for Internet Protocol. This network protocol outlines how almost all machine-to-machine communications 
should happen in the world. Other protocols like TCP, UDP and HTTP are built on top of IP.
  - Modern internet effectively runs following the internet protocols.
  - Data are sent in the form of IP packets.
  - Packets consists of header and data. Header contains source-destination details, information about data and packet.
  - Packets are limited in size. 2^16 bytes = 0.06MB.
  - If client sent larger data, the data is broken into multiple packets.
  - IP doesn't guarantee that all packets will be recieved by receiver. Some Packet may lost over the network.
  - IP doesn't guarantee packet order. So sent order and receiving order may be different.
  - That's where TCP comes into the picture.

### TCP - Transmission Control Protocol
Network protocol built on top of the Internet Protocol (IP). Allows for ordered, reliable data delivery between
machines over the public internet by creating a connection. TCP is usually implemented in the kernel, which exposes 
sockets to applications that they can use to stream data through an open connection.
  - Built on top of IP
  - Sents IP packet in order.
  - Guarantees the receiver recieves all the packet or if fails clients is acknowledged.
  - For any client server interaction, TCP first creates a TCP connection between client server.
  - TCP connection is established through handshake. 
  - If one machine doesn't sent data in a given amount of period, the connection times out.
  - If one machine want to end the connection, it sents some kind of special message to let the other machine know.
  - TCP is not a robust communication channel. Not enough easy to maintain.
  - That's where HTTP comes into picture.

### HTTP - Hyper Text Transport Protocol
The HyperText Transfer Protocol is a very common network protocol implemented on top of TCP. Clients
make HTTP requests, and servers respond with a response.
  - Built on top of TCP
  - HTTP introduces request response paradigm.
  - So one machine sents request and other respond to the request.
  - So in HTTP, all we deal with request and response.

Requests typically have the following schema:
```
  host: string (example: algoexpert.io)
  port: integer (example: 80 or 443)
  method: string (example: GET, PUT, POST, DELETE, OPTIONS or PATCH)
  headers: pair list (example: "Content-Type" => "application/json")
  body: opaque sequence of bytes
```

Responses typically have the following schema:
```
  status code: integer (example: 200, 401)
  headers: pair list (example: "Content-Length" => 1238)
  body: opaque sequence of bytes
```

### IP Packet
Sometimes more broadly referred to as just a (network) packet, an IP packet is effectively the smallest unit
used to describe data being sent over IP, aside from bytes. An IP packet consists of:
  - An IP header, which contains the source and destination IP addresses as well as other information related
to the network
  - A payload, which is just the data being sent over the network
