# Proxy
Proxy - representing someone else

A proxy server, sometimes referred to as a forward proxy, is a server that routes traffic between client(s) and server.
By doing so, it can 
  - regulate traffic according to preset policies
  - convert and mask client IP addresses
  - enforce security protocols
  - block unknown traffic

### Forward Proxy
  - seats between client and server
  - act on behalf of client
  - client sends request to froward proxy, which forwards request to server
  - servers get the request from proxy and response back to the proxy
  - normally forword proxy replace the request source as it is the original source
  - VPN works as a forward proxy in its simplified way
  - server has no idea that client and forward proxy are different entity. it sees only the proxy as a client.

### Reverse Proxy
A reverse proxy is a web server that centralizes internal services and provides unified interfaces to the public. Requests from clients are forwarded to a server that can fulfill it before the reverse proxy returns the server's response to the client.
  - seats between client and server
  - acts on behalf of server
  - when client sends request to server, the request goes to reverse proxy
  - client has no idea about proxy. client thiks it is interecting with server
  - when reverse proxy is configured correctly, DNS query returns the IP address of reverse proxy
  - client has no idea, that there are two entity, reverse proxy and server
  - client sending request by knowing that it is requesting to server
  - in a complecated system, reverse proxy is very usefull
  - reverse proxy can be used to filter certain request to ignore so that the server doesn't have to deal with such request
  - can be used to request logging
  - caching
  - athentication
  - one of the best use case of reverse proxy is using it as a load balancer

Additional benefits include:
  - Increased security - Hide information about backend servers, blacklist IPs, limit number of connections per client
  - Increased scalability and flexibility - Clients only see the reverse proxy's IP, allowing you to scale servers or change their configuration
  - SSL termination - Decrypt incoming requests and encrypt server responses so backend servers do not have to perform these potentially expensive operations
  - Removes the need to install X.509 certificates on each server
  - Compression - Compress server responses
  - Caching - Return the response for cached requests
  - Static content - Serve static content directly
    - HTML/CSS/JS
    - Photos
    - Videos
    - Etc

Load balancer vs reverse proxy
  - Deploying a load balancer is useful when you have multiple servers. Often, load balancers route traffic to a set of servers serving the same function.
  - Reverse proxies can be useful even with just one web server or application server, opening up the benefits described in the previous section.
  - Solutions such as NGINX and HAProxy can support both layer 7 reverse proxying and load balancing.

Disadvantage(s): reverse proxy
  - Introducing a reverse proxy results in increased complexity.
  - A single reverse proxy is a single point of failure, configuring multiple reverse proxies (ie a failover) further increases complexity.


#### Example for demo
  - vscode and terminal
  - open and run server.js
  - curl localhost://3000
  - nginx -t
  - code -r nginx.config
  - nginx
  - curl localhost://8080
  - 

https://www.strongdm.com/blog/difference-between-proxy-and-reverse-proxy#:~:text=A%20traditional%20forward%20proxy%20server,on%20behalf%20of%20multiple%20servers.
