# Replication And Sharding

### Replication
The act of duplicating the data from one database server to others. This is sometimes used to increase the
redundancy of your system and tolerate regional failures for instance. Other times you can use replication to
move data closer to your clients, thus decreasing the latency of accessing specific data.


### Sharding
Sometimes called data partitioning, sharding is the act of splitting a database into two or more pieces called
shards and is typically done to increase the throughput of your database. Popular sharding strategies include:
  - Sharding based on a client's region
  - Sharding based on the type of data being stored (e.g: user data gets stored in one shard, payments data gets stored in another shard)
  - Sharding based on the hash of a column (only for structured data)


### Hot Spot
When distributing a workload across a set of servers, that workload might be spread unevenly. This can
happen if your sharding key or your hashing function are suboptimal, or if your workload is naturally
skewed: some servers will receive a lot more traffic than others, thus creating a "hot spot".


### Availability
The odds of a particular server or service being up and running at any point in time, usually measured in
percentages. A server that has 99% availability will be operational 99% of the time (this would be described as
having two nines of availability).


### Latency
The time it takes for a certain operation to complete in a system. Most often this measure is a time duration,
like milliseconds or seconds. You should know these orders of magnitude:
  - Reading 1 MB from RAM: 250 μs (0.25 ms)
  - Reading 1 MB from SSD: 1,000 μs (1 ms)
  - Transfer 1 MB over Network: 10,000 μs (10 ms)
  - Reading 1MB from HDD: 20,000 μs (20 ms)
  - Inter-Continental Round Trip: 150,000 μs (150 ms)


### Throughput
The number of operations that a system can handle properly per time unit. For instance the throughput of a
server can often be measured in requests per second (RPS or QPS).


### Redundancy
The process of replicating parts of a system in an effort to make it more reliable.
